So in this module we wanna talk about
performance evaluation, and as most of you
know from having worked in organizations
there are a couple of purposes.
One is rewards and punishment.
Mostly firms tie rewards,
whether it's a raise or
a bonus or sometimes a promotion to
some kind of performance evaluation.
But also firms do this for feedback.
They want employees to
get better at their jobs.
This is a means of giving
that kinds of feedback.
The kind of feedback is necessary
to get better at your job.
But this is performance evaluation,
and we're gonna focus on performance
evaluation as opposed
to talent management.
It's really tough to compare employees,
if they're not in identical situations.
So we'll talk elsewhere in the people
analytics course about talent management
and comparing employees.
Right now, we really want to focus on
evaluating the performance management of
a given employee.
For this starting place for
this lecture and a little bit for
life you might think about beginning by
assuming all employees are equal ability.
That's a rough decent starting place.
For what we're gonna do here.
Begin by assuming all
employees are equal ability.
And now, we're trying to figure
out how hard are they working and
how can we improve them at their job.
So the fundamental challenge
in performance evaluation
is that performance measures are noisy.
Whatever means we wanna use for
evaluating how our employees performing is
imperfectly related to what their actually
doing with how hard they're working or
how smart they're working.
And that slippage is essentially noise.
This is how a statistician
would think about it,
this is how an economist
would think about it.
They're noise in the performance measures.
And this is gonna be a problem for
us if we're trying to infer from these
performance measures
something about the employee.
You can think about it as
a normal distribution.
So for any given level of effort,
you might see the performance measure line
up perfectly with that level of effort or
you might see it come in a little high or
a little low.
So a range of outcomes can occur due to
factors outside the employees control.
So no matter how hard they work or
how smart they work they have competitors,
they have team members, they have bosses,
they have an economy that
they're interacting with.
All of these things are outside
the employees control.
So there's noise, there's slippage
between what the employee tries to do,
how hard they work,
how smart they work and
the performance measure that
results as a consequence of that.
So this is our challenge,
separating skill from luck.
And for a person like me, this is
one of the great challenges in life.
You're forever trying to separate
from what we see how much is luck and
how much is skill?
There's an economist at the University
of Chicago, John Huizinga.
Who said recently in an interview, this
distinction between ascertaining skill and
luck shows up all the time.
Who do you give your money to for
investing?
How much do you pay a certain employee?
It's everywhere.
It isn't just about sports.
It's about life.
So that's really what we are trying
to do here in this performance
evaluation module.
We are trying to separate skill from luck.
You might think of it
as signal verses noise.
We wanna understand the true signal,
even though we only get
noisy performance measures.
So in southern environments this isn't so
hard.
For example, in this picture I've
shown two normal distributions and
you can think of this as what might result
if an employee gives high effort or
if the employee gives low effort.
And we're gonna use for our simple
model here, we're gonna use effort, but
that's just a simplification.
You can think of this as working smart.
You can think of this,
you can even though we wanna avoid for
the moment thinking of this as being
a high talent versus low talent.
So for the moment let's just
think of it as high effort.
Are they working hard or
are they not working hard?
In the world I've
described in this picture,
the outcome measures that result from high
effort or low effort are quite different.
So you see that the high effort
distribution is quite a bit higher,
quite a bit closer to the good outcomes
then is the low effort distribution.
So that when you get a performance measure
that's pretty high on the good outcomes
scale, you can be pretty sure
that came from high efforts.
So you can infer this
employee did something well.
This employee did something right.
You can give them positive feedback.
Conversely if you see something
in this world that is very
low on the outcome scale,
close to the bad outcomes end
then you can be quite confident
that that came from low effort.
That's because these
signals are quite separate.
So in this environment,
it's not very hard to tell whether
your employee is working hard or not.
You get pretty clean signals.
Now it's not perfect.
If you get an average performance measure,
it can be ambiguous and
that's gonna be the case often.
But for a broad range of outcomes,
you can be pretty confident about what
kind of effort the employee gave.
But in other environments, it's brutal to
determine whether the employee gave high
effort or low effort because of how
overlapping the distributions are.
So for example in this situation,
the good outcome measure more
likely came from high effort, but
there's still a very reasonable
probability that it came from low effort.
That maybe someone didn't put in much
work, but the economy broke just right for
them or their boss covered them or
the team they worked with happened
to be really on that month.
All of those things are outside
the employee's control, but
can lead to a low effort performance
resulting in a positive consequence.
And vice versa,
you might get a bad outcome and
think on average that came from low effort
but there's still a very reasonable
chance, because of the noise in the
measure that it came from a high effort.
Again, it could be that they
put in 80 hours that week, but
their teammates let them down or
their boss made a bad decision or
their competitor made an unexpected move.
So in these environments,
it's very difficult to ascertain
the level of effort from
a noisy performance measure.
This in essence is the challenge
with performance evaluation.
It's not always quite this difficult,
there's not always this much overlap but
there's always some level of noise and
it makes it difficult to infer,
it makes it difficult to give
the right kind of feedback.
We want to give you some help sorting this
environment because all of you are being
judged in this way to some extent, and all
of you are judging employees in this way.
So this is gonna motivate everything
that comes next essentially.
We're gonna give you some examples,
some techniques and importantly
some biases that people have whenever
they try to make these inferences.
So the merger plan, first is to
give you an extended example and
then drop in to four specific issues and
unpack those.
Because there are biases associated
with each of those issues and
that will lead to some prescriptions
which we provide as we go on and
then we summarize in the last stage